Table of Contents
1. Introduction to Subqueries

Independent Subquery
Singie-Row Subquery
Multiple-Row Subquery
Multiple-column Subqueries
Correlated Subqueries

2. Summary

Introduction
This module introduces us to the necessity of subqueries.

Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this module, you wil be able to:
-> State the needs of subqueries in SQL

1. Introduction to Subqueries

It may not be always possible to mention the filter conditions for a SELECT query directly; like forexample department_id = 10. Such conditions may have to be derived from another query. Such queries are referred as subqueries.

A query within a query is called subquery. It is usually used in the WHERE clause of a SELECT statement. However, it can also appear in SELECT and FROM clauses. A subquery in turm can contain another subquery. This is called nested subquery. There are many types of subqueries which are listed as below.

Independent Subquery

Independent subquery is executed independent of the main query. In this case, subquery executes only ornce irrespective of the number of rows fetched by the main query.

Single-Row Subqueryy

A Single-Row subquery is a subquery which retums only one row.

Multiple-Row Subquery

A multiple-Row subquery is a subquery which retums multiple rows.

Multiple-column Subqueries

When a subquery contains more than one column in the query it is a multiple-column subquery.

Correlated Subqueries

When subquery references a column from a table used in the parent query, it is a correlated subquery. In a correlated subquery, the subquery or the inner query is executed once for each rovw of the main query or the outer query.

2. Summary

-> A query within a query is called a subquery
-> A single-row subquery is a subquery which returns only one row.
-> A multple-row subquery is a subquery which returns multiple rows
-> When a subquery contains more than one column in the query it is a multiple-column subquery.
-> When subquery references a column from a table used in the parent query, it is a correlated subquery