Table of Contents
1. Joins
1.1 INNER Join
1.2 Cartesian Joins
1.3 OUTER Joins
2. Summary

Introduction
This module introduces us to the various joins in SQL

Learning Objectives
Upon completion of this module, you will be able to:
-> List the types of joins in SQL

1. Joins
In practical situations, there arises a need to fetch data stored in two or more tables using single SELECT statement. This can be achieved by using a join query

In order to join two tables, we need to identify a common column in each of those tables. This common column relates the two tables. The common column need not have the same names in tables.

There are various joins in SQL.

1.1 INNER Join

In inner join, the two tables are joined using equality comparison operator. Such query is also called as equality join or equijoin.

1.2 Cartesian Joins

In a Cartesian join, each row in the first table will be joined with erery row in the second table. If there are 'n' mumber of rovws in the first table and 'm' number of rows in the second table, Cartesian join will return'n*m' rows. Cartesian join is the default join method when we omit the join condition in the WHERE cdause.

1.3 OUTER Joins

An outer join returns all the rows that satisfy the join condition and also retums rows from one table for which no rows from the other table satisfy the join condition.

OUTER join can be further classified as
-> LEFT OUTER Join
-> RIGHT OUTER Join
-> FULL OUTER Join

LEFT OUTER JOIN

Left outer join returns rows from both tables that match the join condition, and also returm all the rows from the left table for which there is no match in the table that is on the right.

RIGHT OUTER JOIN

Right outer join returns rows from both tables that match the join condition, and also retum all the rows from the right table for which there is no match in the table that is on the left.

FULL OUTER JOIN

Full outer join is a combination of both left and right outer joins.

Full outer join retums rows from both tables that match the join condition, and also retum all the rows from the right table for which there is no match in the table that is on the left as well as rows from the left table for which there is no match in the table that is on the right.

2. Summary
Here are the key takeaways:

-> If tvo tables are joined using equality comparison operator, the query is called inner join or equality join or equijoin.

-> Cartesian join occurs when we omit the join condition in the WHERE clause.

-> A left outer join retums rows based on the inner join condition as wvell as rows from the table to the left of the JOIN dause for which there is no match.

-> A right outer join retums rows based on the inner join condition as well as rows from the table to the right of the JOIN clause for which there is no match.