Q - Which of the following does not contain steps of an algorithm?

Routine
Subroutine
Method
Function
Object

Ans - Object does not represent the steps of an algorithm, but has fields and methods to operate on the fields.

Q - Who wrote the book called 'Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software'?

Grady Booch
Dennis Ritchie
Gang Of Four
Ramuk Doniv

Ans -  The book Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software' was written by Gang of Four, in 1995 which explores the capabilities and pitfals of OOP. The book describes 23 common programming problems and patterns for solving them.

Q - In a UML class diagram, what is the symbol used for a protected member?

Plus (+)
Correct - Minus (-)
Hash (#)
Slash (/)
Percent (%)

Ans - Plus is used for public and Hash is used for
protected members. Slash and Percent are
not used in UML class diagrams.

Q - An object of a class is also known as

a member
an instance
a variable
a reference

Ans - The process of creating an object is known as instantiation, and hence the result of instantation is instance.

Q - Which of the following is not a major element in OOP?
Abstraction
Encapsulation
Typing
Hierarchy

Ans - The four major elements of OOP include
Abstraction, Encapsulation, Hierarchy, and
Modularity.

Q - In case of ______________ object continues to exist even after its creator ceases to exist.

Encapsulation
Typing
Persistence
Modularity

Ans - Persistence is the property of an object through
which its existence transcends time and hence
the object continues to exist even after its creator
ceases to exist.

Q - Abstraction ______________ on details that are significant to the viewer.

emphasises
suppresses
ignores
Ans - Abstraction presents an object's view relative to the perspective of who is using it

Q - Encapsulation is generally used for

Hiding the data members

Emphasizing on the details that are significant to the viewer

Presenting an object's view relative to the perspective of who is using it

Ans - Encapsulation is the mechanism for restricting access to Some components of an object, and hence hide the data members which are accessed via public methods.

Q - In a UML class diagram, encapsulated members are prefīxed with the symbol.

Plus
Minus
Hash

Ans - Encapsulated members are denoted as private and hence we use the minus symbol to the same in a UML class diagram.

Q - Which of the following does not describe aggregation?
Select the correct option and olick Submit.

Whole-part relationship
Object "A" belongs to object "B"
Has-A
Is-A

Ans - Is-A relationship describes inheritance and
not aggregation.

Q - In aggregation, the constituent continues to exist even after a composite is destroyed. Is this statement correct?


Yes
No

Ans - For example, A universisty has departments and a
department has proteSsors. It the university closes,
the departments will no longer exIst. But the
professors in those departments will continue to exist.

Q - Which of the following is not allowed in Java?

Single inheritance
Multiple inheritance
Multilevel inheritance
Hierarchical inheritance

Ans - Java does not allow multiple inheritance between classes. However, be aware that it is allowed to have intertaces.

Q - Which of the following is not a type of hierarchy?

Inheritance
Aggregation
Composition
Overriding

Ans - Inheritance, Aggregation and Composition defines a relationship between various classes in an application. Overniding is only to re-write an inherited method to provide a different behavior in the subclass.

Q - Which of the following is not allowed in Java?

Method overriding
Operator overloading
Method overloading
Constructor overloading

Ans- Overloading of operators are not allowed in Java, unlike C++ or C#.

Q - Which of the following is also known as inclusion polymorphism?

Subtyping
Ad-hoc
Parametric
Operator overloading

Ans - Subtyping is also known as inclusion Polymorphism and involves a super-subtype relationship.

Q - As a best practice, hoW would you like to arrange the members?

Constructors, Fields, Getters/setters
Constructors, Getters/setters, Fields
Getters/setters, Fields, Constructors
Fields, Constructors, Getters/setters

Ans - AS a best practice, arrange the members in this order.
Fields, Constructors, Getters/setters, Overridden methods, Other methods

Q - Which of the following is incorrect regarding a source code?

Only one public class per source file
Source filename must match the public class name
A source code Is saved in a file with the extenslon of .java
A source code can not contain more than one Java class definition

Ans - A source code can contain any number of class definition, but only one of them can be marked as public. Source filename must match the public class name.

Q - What does the above statement return?

A named object
Correct - An anonymous object 
A nested object
A proxy object

new Object(){
    public void sayHello(){
        System.out printin("Hello.");
    }
};

Ans- The curly braces after the "new Object()" is equivalent to a nameless class that extends Object. Inside the braces, we can define new methods or Override the inherited methods

Q - To provide encapsulation, hide the data members using.

private access
protected access
package level access
minus symbol

Ans - To protect these state variables, we use the concept of encapsulaton. Hide the data members using 'private. Expose the access to them using public methods

Q - A member can be shared with all instances of the class by declaring it as

abstract
final
private
static

Ans - static members belong to the class and only one
Copy exists in the JVM.

Q - Which of the following is not true if the method of a class marked as 'final?

Makes the class as non-concrete, and forces the class
as final

Method must have body

When inherited, subclass can not override such method

Makes this function to be used as-is by objects of subclasses

Ans - A class is made as non-concrete when a method is marked as abstract, and forces the class as abstract.

Q - A parameter can also be marked as ______________ to indicate that the value of the parameter supplied may not be changed within the method.

single
constant
const
final

Ans - A parameter can also be marked as 'final' too indicate that the value of the parameter supplied may not be changed within the method.

Q - Which of the following is not overloading?

Correct - int sayHello(String name);
void sayHello(String user);
void sayHello(String user, String city);
Ovoid sayHello(Stringoll users);

Ans - While overloading the methods, only the signature must differ. By return type alone, Overloading can not be established.

Q - The 'this' keyword can not be used inside:

constructors
non-static methods
static methods

Ans - Static methods do not need object creation. The reference this refers to the invoking object, with out which this can not be used.

Q - The this' keyword can also be used to invoke a constructor from another one. True or false?

Correct - True
False

Let us understand this with the help of an example

Employee(int id) {
    this.id = id;
    this('ADMIN", 20000.0);
}

Employee(String dept, double salary) {
    this.dept= dept,
    this.salary salary
}

Q - The ______________ stage is where the deletion of objects take place.

sweeping
marking
Compacting 

Ans - The traditional way is to let the allocator methods use complex data structure to search the memory for the required free space

Q - In a generational GC, new objects are created in _

Young generation
Old generation
Permanent generation
Survivor spaces

Ans - Young generations contain new and young Objects. It is divided into eden, and two Survivor spaces.

Which generation contains objects that have reached the minor GC age threshold?
Select the correct option and click Submit.
Eden
Survivor spaces
Old generation
Permanent generation

Ans - Old generation contains objects that have reached the minor GC age threshold. Major GC is performed on this generation, when the threshold is reached here.

Q - Which of the following is an incorrect statement regarding the constructors?

Can not be explicitly invoked
Correct - Can not be parameterised
Does not have a return type, not even void
Sets the initial state of an object during the object creation

Ans - By adding parameters to the constructor, overloading of constructors can be done.

Q - If there is no initialization required, do not add a default constructor.lf there is no initialization required, do not add a defauit constructor

True
Correct -  False
Ans - It is a good practice to add a default, no argument constructor, even if you do not have anything to do in it.

Q - What is a method signature?

return type + name

return type + name + arguments

name + arguments

return type + arguments

Ans - Signature of a method is the combination of name and arguments (if any).

Q -  Choose the correct statement regarding constructor

Correct - Constructors are automatically called during object creation

Constructors are automatically called before object creation

Constructors can be called using an object reference

An object can be created using more than one constructor

Ans -  Creating an object involves using the constructor.
For example,
Employee emp = new Employee();
The brackets here determine which constructor to call.

